OGTT was performed in both HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ and iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice at ten weeks post-STZ injection. The results revealed that upon administering glucose as a stimulus, iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice exhibited a more gradual and controlled increase in blood glucose levels compared to HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice, whose blood glucose levels spiked rapidly and peaked at levels greater than 600 mg/dL, surpassing the detection limit of our standard measuring glucometer, within 15 min of administration (Fig. 3E). Furthermore, the blood glucose levels of iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice peaked and began to decline between 30 and 45 min post-administration, while HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice displayed a decreasing trend in blood glucose levels much later, at a time range between 60 and 120 min post-administration (Fig. 3E). We quantified the area under the curve (AUC) of the OGTT blood glucose curve after normalizing for baseline glucose differences. Our analysis revealed a significant reduction in AUC in iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice compared to HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice, indicating that iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice utilize glucose more efficiently, resulting in increased glucose tolerance (Fig. 3F).

In addition to evaluating glucose metabolism, we also investigated the impact of hyperglycemia reduction upon HMGB1 knockdown on the liver and kidneys, organs that play a critical role in glucose metabolism and metabolic regulation. Our assessment of the plasma samples collected from HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ and iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice following 10 weeks post last injection revealed that although ALT levels were comparable between the two groups, HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice displayed significantly elevated levels of AST, an indicator of liver damage, compared to iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice (Supplemental Figs. 3A and 3B). To better interpret our data, we calculated the widely used AST/ALT ratio, which showed that iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice had a ratio of approximately 1, whereas HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice exhibited a substantially higher AST/ALT ratio of around 2, suggesting that the presence of HMGB1 contributes to more severe liver damage under hyperglycemic conditions (Supplemental Fig. 3C). To further investigate the role of HMGB1 in liver damage, we examined the pathological effects of HMGB1 knockdown in the liver under a hyperglycemic state. HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice displayed an increase in macrovesicular lipid droplets and greater signs of mononuclear inflammatory infiltration compared to iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice (Supplemental Fig. 3D). Additionally, PAS and Oil Red O staining revealed that HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice exhibited increased glycogen storage and lipid uptake (Supplemental Figs. 3E and F). Furthermore, we evaluated the impact of HMGB1 knockdown on the kidneys, the primary organs responsible for excreting excess glucose in clinical DM patients. We measured circulating levels of Cystatin C in plasma samples obtained from HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ and iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice 10 weeks post hyperglycemia development. Our results indicate that iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice exhibited significantly elevated levels of Cystatin C compared to HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice (Supplemental Fig. 4).

Given the observed compelling in vivo phenotype and the liver's central role in metabolism, we aimed to understand the potential mechanism at play in the liver by conducting RNA sequencing on liver harvested from HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ and iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice 10 weeks post last injection. We performed differential expression analysis on the raw RNA sequence data and identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs), with a particular interest in genes relevant to hyperglycemia, gluconeogenesis, and diabetes. We subsequently represented these genes of interest in a volcano plot and heatmap, respectively, providing visual representations of DEGs occurred as a result of systemic HMGB1 knockdown in the liver of hyperglycemia mice (Fig. 4A, C). In addition to examining specific gene alterations, we also sought to identify and describe the key pathways impacted by HMGB1 knockdown. Therefore, we performed an Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) on the DEGs to detect enriched pathways. Notably, the NRF2-mediated oxidative stress response pathway emerged as one of the most enriched pathways, indicating a potentially more involved and altered response to HMGB1 knockdown. The FXR/LXR/RXR activation pathways, which are heavily involved in liver glucose and lipid metabolism, also shown to be highly enriched (Fig. 4B). To facilitate future mechanistic studies, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) analysis to connect genes with pathways of interest. We found that lipid homeostasis was one of the most significantly altered pathways, with ABCG5/8, MLXIPL, APOA4, and other genes closely linked to this pathway. Additionally, we identified ULK1, AYG2A, WDR45, and additional genes that contributed to multiple pathways associated with autophagy (Fig. 4E). In addition to investigating genes and pathway alterations associated with HMGB1 knockdown, we utilized IPA disease and function analysis to predict potential changes in phenotype using DEGs identified previously. Our analysis suggested with high confidence a decrease in liver lesion and liver fibrosis in iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice, consistent with our previous in vivo findings (Fig. 4D). In addition, we also identified a set of DEGs that are linked and responsible to the phenotypic changes observed in our study. This additional perspective offers valuable insights to inform and facilitate future mechanistic investigations.Fig. 4RNA sequencing analysis identifies key genes and pathways influenced by HMGB1 knockdown in the liver of hyperglycemic mice.A) Volcano plot and (C) heat map demonstrate the up- and down-regulated genes of interest upon HMGB1 knockdown, with red indicating up-regulation and blue indicating down-regulation. (B) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to identify highly enriched pathways as a result of HMGB1 knockdown using DEGs (Differentially Expressed Genes). (D) IPA analysis also revealed predictive changes in diseases/phenotypes associated with the identified DEGs, with the corresponding genes responsible shown on the left and the predicted direction of the disease/phenotype identified indicated by positive or negative Z scores shown on the right. (E) Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed, and genes and pathways of interest are linked in a chord graph to direct further gene specific pathway studies.Fig. 4

To contrast the observed findings in the liver, we performed the same RNA sequencing analysis on skeletal muscle and, again, identified DEGs. We annotated key genes associated with DM and hyperglycemia and visually represented the DEGs with volcano plots and heatmaps (Fig. 5A, C). Our IPA analysis revealed unique pathways altered in skeletal muscle in iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice, which were distinct from those identified in the liver. Among the top altered pathways identified, most were directly associated with DM and hyperglycemia phenotypes, such as insulin secretion signaling pathways. In addition, there were also some similarly altered pathways in the skeletal muscle as those identified in the liver, such as NRF2-mediated oxidative stress response and RXR-related activation (Fig. 5B). This prompt us to compare enriched pathways identified previously with those newly identified in skeletal muscle, we found that HMGB1 appears to regulate different organs through both overlapping and distinct pathways to impact glucose metabolism (Supplemental Fig. 5). To further explore potential connections between the identified DEGs and pathways associated with skeletal muscle, we conducted Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis. Our KEGG analysis revealed canonical pathways that are like those previously identified by IPA, with most closely linked to DM and hyperglycemia phenotypes. We identified key genes responsible for these changes, including GCK, PRKCE, MAFA, and Adipoq. Furthermore, we observed significant potential alternations in pyruvate metabolism and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, with potential genes including PDHA1 and ALDH2 being responsible. Importantly, our KEGG analysis also demonstrated that the AGE-RAGE signaling pathway was significantly perturbed in skeletal muscle following HMGB1 knockdown in hyperglycemia mice. This finding is particularly noteworthy as RAGE is one of the primary canonical cellular receptors for HMGB1. We identified that FN1, COL3A1, CDKN1B, and PRKCE are among the genes associated with this signaling pathway, potentially involved in mediating HMGB1 to affect DM phenotype through RAGE (Fig. 5D).Fig. 5RNA sequencing analysis identifies the genes and pathways associated with DM and hyperglycemia that are impacted by HMGB1 knockdown in skeletal muscleA) A volcano plot and (C) a heat map displays the up- and down-regulated DEGs (Differentially Expressed Genes) of particular interest upon HMGB1 knockdown in hyperglycemic mice, with red indicating up-regulation and blue indicating down-regulation. (B) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was utilized to identify highly enriched pathways that are altered by HMGB1 knockdown in skeletal muscle. (D) Further pathway analysis using the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database was performed to identify additional pathways and genes of interest that are directly influenced by HMGB1 knockdown. A chord graph is used to link genes and pathways of interest, directing further studies.Fig. 5

