These studies were conducted by Dr. Michael Jurczak in the Rodent Phenotyping Core within the Center for Metabolism and Mitochondrial Medicine in the Department of Endocrinology at the University of Pittsburgh. For OGTT, an N of 7 iHMGB1 KO mice and 8 HMGB1 Flox mice underwent a 16-h fasting period prior to the study. Initial blood glucose concentrations were measured using a commercial glucometer to establish a reference point. Subsequently, iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ and HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice were then administered an oral glucose solution (2 g/kg of body weight), and blood glucose levels were measured at baseline, 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after glucose administration using a glucometer to assess glucose tolerance. The quantification of the Area Under the Curve (AUC) was performed to accurately represent the results of the OGTT following normalization with respect to the baseline glucose difference. The method employed in this study was adapted and modified from Jurczak et al., with some alterations to better suit the specific objectives and design of our study [37].

For development of the appropriate hyperglycemic model to test our hypothesis, we needed to decide to test the implementation of a diet intervention rather than just using low STZ alone. Therefore, we decided to test a normal diet vs high fat diet implementation using metabolic cage analysis to decide on the best approach [38]. Due to the low breeding yield of iHMGB1 KO mice, we decided to test the best experimental approach using our control mice. We therefore placed an N of 6 HMGB1 Flox mice per group randomized into three distinct groups based on their dietary and treatment conditions: Normal Chow (NC) + STZ, High Fat Diet (HFD), and STZ + HFD. Each mouse was individually housed in a metabolic cage for a duration of 24 h. This setup facilitated the measurement of energy expenditure, respiratory exchange ratio (RER), and physical activity, utilizing a comprehensive laboratory animal monitoring system. The conditions within the cages were meticulously maintained at a stable temperature of 23 °C and were subjected to a 12-h light/dark cycle.

An N of 8 HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ and 7 iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice that have hyperglycemia developed for 10 weeks were fasted for 12 h overnight. The mice were then anesthetized using isoflurane and blood was collected by cardiac puncture using a 1 mL syringe. The collected blood was drawn into citrate-coated tubes and centrifuged at 3000 g for 15 min at 4 °C to obtain plasma. Prior to ELISA analysis, the plasma samples were diluted 1:4 with 0.9 % sodium chloride solution. Cystatin C (CST3) Mouse ELISA (Invitrogen, EMCST3) and HMGB1/HMG-1 ELISA Kit (Novusbio, Size/NBP2-62767) were performed following the manufacturer's protocol to quantify Cystatin C and HMGB1 levels in the plasma samples, respectively.

Plasma samples collected from above were thawed and diluted 1:10 for measurement of Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) using DRI-CHEM (Heska, Loveland, CO), in accordance with the manufacturer's kit and recommended protocols. AST/ALT ratio was also calculated.

The same plasma samples collected for ELISA analysis were also diluted 1:2 and sent to Eve Technologies for a metabolic discovery assay. Technical duplicates were performed for each assay. A range of biomarkers were analyzed, including Amylin (active), C-Peptide 2, GIP (total), GLP-1 (active), Ghrelin (active), Glucagon, Insulin, Leptin, PP, PYY, Resistin, and Secretin.

Liver samples were obtained from the same cohort of HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ and iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice that have hyperglycemia developed for 10 weeks post last injection. Before harvesting, the liver was perfused with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA) to remove blood, preserve tissue structure, and initiate tissue fixation. Subsequently, the liver specimens were then immersed and further fixed in 4 % PFA for 4 h, followed by overnight incubation in a 30 % sucrose solution for cryoprotection. The specimens were embedded in OCT solution and cryosectioned into 10 μm-thick sections. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining (abcam, ab245880), Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS) staining (abcam, ab150680) and Oil Red O (Lipid Stain) Solution (abcam, ab223796) were performed on the same tissue sections according to the manufacturer's protocol. Bright field microscope images were captured for analysis at 10X and 20X imaging focus.

An N of 4 HMGB1 flox TMX STZ mice and 4 iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice tissue lysates underwent lysis through cell lysis buffer (Cell signaling, Cat #: 9803) and brief sonication (<10secs). Resultant protein lysates supernatant were acquired post-centrifugation (14,000g) and quantified via BCA protein assay (Thermofisher, Cat #: 23225). Western blot analysis employed a Mini Gel Tank (Thermofisher, Cat #: NW2000) following manufacturer guideline, with a loading of 20 μg protein per lane. Ponceau S stain was performed on each membrane to verify protein loading, ensuring data normalization. Images of the stained membranes are available in the repository and can be provided upon request. Subsequently, the membranes were blocked using a solution of 5 % BSA in TBST for 1 h. After three 10-min washes with TBST, they were incubated with primary antibody (1:1000 dilution in 5 % BSA, HMGB1, Abcam, ab18256) overnight, ensuring gentle rocking throughout. After another series of three 10-min washes with TBST, the membranes were treated with the goat-anti rabbit secondary antibody (1:10,000 dilution in 5 % BSA, Invitrogen, 31460) for an hour at room temperature, again with gentle rocking. ImageJ software was used for Western blot analysis and band quantification.

An N of 4 HMGB1 flox TMX STZ mice and 4 iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice tail snips, measuring approximately 0.5 cm, were obtained following TMX injection. For comparative purposes, control Flox and C57/BL6 mice were also included in the study. Genomic DNA was isolated using the TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, 15596026) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The region of interest within the HMGB1 gene was amplified using PCR. The resultant PCR products were then separated on a 1.5 % agarose gel via electrophoresis, run at 100V for a duration of 30 min. The bands were subsequently visualized under UV light.

Transcriptome sequencing was performed on an N of 4 HMGB1 flox TMX STZ mice and 4 iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice 10 weeks post TMX and STZ injection. Liver and skeletal muscle were collected from these animals. RNA was extracted using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, 15596026), as per the manufacturer's protocol. Per individual mouse, quality control was performed on the raw sequencing reads by tool FastQC. Based on this, reads were trimmed by their sequencing quality and adapter sequences by tool Trimmomatic. After trimming, the surviving reads were aligned to mouse reference genome mm10 by STAR aligner. Gene count per sample were then quantified by STAR --quantMode GeneCounts function. After pre-processing, gene count matrix was used for downstream statistical analysis. Differential expression analysis was performed to compare iHMGB1 KO TMX STZ mice with HMGB1 Flox TMX STZ mice using R package DESeq2. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were defined by FDR = 5 % and fold-change ≥ 1.5 cutoff. Further, these DEGs were applied into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to detect enriched pathways. Significant pathways were defined by FDR = 5 %. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis were performed using clusterprofiler on DEGs. Graphs were plotted by https://www.bioinformatics.com.cn/en (last accessed on Feb 13, 2023), an online platform for data analysis and visualization.

