Liver RNA sequencing analysis revealed a marked enrichment in the NRF2-mediated oxidative stress pathway, suggesting its potential significance in mediating the phenotype observed in vivo. It is important to note that the NRF2-mediated oxidative stress pathway has not only been strongly associated with liver diseases and injury [73], but also implicated in the onset, progression, and cytokine regulation of DM [74,75]. Emerging evidence support the correlation between NRF2 and DM and posits that NRF2 may serve a protective function against the development of DM and its associated macrovascular complications [[76], [77], [78]]. In addition, HMGB1 has been demonstrated to regulate ferroptosis via NRF2, particularly in the context of high glucose levels, further highlighting the potential benefits of targeting the NRF2-mediated oxidative stress pathway in future research endeavors [79]. Besides NRF2, we also observed a significant enrichment of pathways related to FXR/LXR/PXR-RXR activation under HMGB1 knockdown in the liver. FXR and LXR have been extensively researched due to their crucial roles in glucose and lipid metabolism. Recent studies have further identified these pathways as central to the development and onset of DM, making them particularly intriguing for our future investigations [80,81]. Our current study also utilized GO analysis and established connections between genes and pathways to better direct future mechanistic studies. The results indicated that autophagy-related pathways are significantly altered in HMGB1 knockdown mice. Autophagy is a cellular process triggered by stress [82], and several studies have established its involvement in glucose metabolism [[83], [84], [85]], especially in response to high glucose [82,86]. Autophagy is particularly interesting to us also because several studies have shown that endogenous HMGB1 can influence the autophagy process. This highlights the potentially important role that autophagy may play in the observed in vivo phenotype upon HMGB1 knockdown [[87], [88], [89]].

We also investigated pathways associated with the vital role skeletal muscle plays. Interestingly, while we found some shared pathways between liver and muscle, such as the NRF2 oxidative stress response, most were unique to muscle tissue. Through IPA we identified that skeletal muscle has a more direct involvement in regulating glucose metabolism and insulin signaling, with numerous associated pathways being enriched. Our observations stand in contrast to the liver, which is primarily associated with more indirect pathways, such as oxidative stress. This finding aligns with prior research that recognizes skeletal muscle as the primary organ responsible for maintaining glucose homeostasis, contributing to over 80 % of glucose uptake [90]. Furthermore, using KEGG analysis, we discovered that the AGE-RAGE signaling pathway seems to be a key driver behind the phenotype observed in HMGB1 knockdown hyperglycemic mice. This is particularly noteworthy because RAGE is one of the primary receptors for HMGB1 [90]. Moreover, studies have reported upregulated AGE-RAGE expression in DM patients, suggesting its potential involvement in DM pathogenesis, which warrants further investigation [91]. Our study has notable limitations. First, we utilized a STZ-induced hyperglycemia mouse model, which focused exclusively on glucose metabolism due to its significant contribution to DM. While this model provided insight into the isolated role of HMGB1 in hyperglycemia, it oversimplifies the complex systemic nature of DM. Nonetheless, the findings have important clinical implications. Secondly, our study was limited to male mice, as our latest cohort revealed reduced responsiveness to STZ induction in female mice (data not shown), aligned with previous study [92]. Thirdly, our study design involved inducing HMGB1 knockdown before the onset of hyperglycemia, which limits the strength of evidence for HMGB1 as a therapeutic target in established DM. In response to the limitations of our study, our future research will build upon our current findings by investigating the effects of HMGB1 knockdown in a more complete DM phenotype that includes female mice and evaluates the therapeutic potential of targeting HMGB1 after hyperglycemia induction. Additionally, we aim to explore the potential tissue-specific effects of HMGB1 knockdown to further elucidate the exact mechanisms at play.

In conclusion, our current investigation stands as the first study to present compelling evidence that HMGB1 plays a pivotal role in regulating glucose metabolism, and that HMGB1 knockdown can significantly mitigate the severity of hyperglycemia in vivo. Our study holds particular significance, as it not only determined the potential therapeutic benefits of targeting HMGB1 to address hyperglycemia and the DM epidemic, but also represents the inaugural study to characterize promising mechanisms underlying the action of HMGB1 knockdown on hyperglycemia and DM.

The data that support the findings of this is available in the MENDELEY DATA repository: Mota Alvidrez, Roberto (2023), “Restoring Glucose Balance: Conditional HMGB1 Knockdown Mitigates Hyperglycemia in A Streptozotocin Induced Mouse Model”, Mendeley Data, V1, https://doi.org/10.17632/ryz5h94pyh.1.

NIGMS 3R35GM119526-07S1 to RIMA; 10.13039/100008237Department of Surgery and Pittsburgh Liver Research Center P&F Award Funding for RIMA (P30 DK120531); 10.13039/100000050NHLBI R25HL145817 to RIMA; 10.13039/100006108NCATS KL2 TR001448 funding for RIMA (10.13039/100007179UNM HSC CTSC).

Raw data, methods, protocols, software, hardware and other outputs – associated with the paper data is included in the MENDELEY Data Repository included in the Data Availability Statement above.

Zeyu Liu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Gowtham Annarapu: Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Hamza O. Yazdani: Validation, Resources, Methodology. Qinge Wang: Resources. Silvia Liu: Validation, Software, Resources, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Jian-Hua Luo: Methodology, Formal analysis. Yan-Ping Yu: Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Baoguo Ren: Methodology, Formal analysis. Matthew D. Neal: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Satdarshan P. Monga: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Roberto Ivan Mota Alvidrez: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential.